Add wordpress blog post (#1069)
FusionAuth/fusionauth-site: site/_posts/2021-10-26-how-to-set-up-single-sign-on-between-fusionauth-wordpress.md

---
layout: blog-post
title: How to Set Up Single Sign-On Between FusionAuth and WordPress
description: In this tutorial, you'll be learning how to implement OAuth SSO for Joomla users.
author: Aniket Bhattacharyea
image: blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/how-to-set-up-single-sign-on-sso-between-fusionauth-and-wordpress-header-image.png
category: blog
tags: tutorial tutorial-php client-php tutorial-integration
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
---

User authentication is one of the most important parts of building any application, and almost every application features some sort of authentication. However, it quickly gets difficult to manage when you have multiple related but independent applications to maintain.

<!--more-->

> Let's say you're building a photo-sharing application that lets a user sign up with a username and password to share their pictures. Your team might later decide to [create a forum using WordPress](https://wordpress.com/go/tutorials/create-a-forum-with-wordpress-com/) to help support your app, but this new project isn't tied to your original application. It uses an entirely different tech stack, database, and hosting setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say you're building a photo-sharing application that lets a user sign up with a username and password to share their pictures. Your team might later decide to [create a forum using WordPress](https://wordpress.com/go/tutorials/create-a-forum-with-wordpress-com/) so that your user's friends and family can comment on the photos, but this new project isn't tied to your original application. It uses an entirely different tech stack, database, and hosting setup.
```

Author: Tweaked in a different way.

This means your users need to sign up _again_ on this second website and remember another set of usernames and passwords. Giving users two entirely different sets of credentials is not ideal, so that's where Single Sign-On comes in.

> Single Sign-On, commonly known as SSO, is an authentication mechanism that enables users to use a single set of credentials to log in to multiple different applications or websites. In a typical SSO setup, you have a service provider—the application the user is trying to log in to—and an identity provider like [FusionAuth](https://fusionauth.io), which handles the authentication. This means your users need only one set of credentials to log into all of your applications.

Reviewer: I'd say "log in to", or "log into". In this paragraph, you use both interchangeably. 

Here's a forum where people hotly debate which one is better.  It looks like both are ok. 
https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/5302/log-in-to-or-log-into-or-login-to

## Using FusionAuth for SSO

To use SSO, you need to choose an Identity provider which will handle the authentication for you. [FusionAuth](https://fusionauth.io/) is one such identity provider. FusionAuth provides libraries for most major programming languages and frameworks, including PHP, Ruby, Python, Java, Go, and .NET.

FusionAuth is fully customizable and is available as a stand-alone package for Linux, Mac, and Windows, so you can self-host FusionAuth on any server. You can even get started for free, so there's no need to enter your credit card number to follow along with this tutorial.

> If you are building a website with WordPress and you need to incorporate user management, you can leverage SSO. It provides a more flexible solution for users and saves them from managing multiple credentials. In this tutorial, you'll learn how to set up Single Sign-On in WordPress using FusionAuth with the help of an [OpenID Connect WordPress plugin](https://wordpress.org/plugins/miniorange-login-with-eve-online-google-facebook/).

Reviewer: this lands as a little confusing if you don't know what user management is. Can you tie it back to the earlier example of the photo app?

## Prerequisites

To integrate FusionAuth with WordPress, you need two things: a WordPress instance with admin permissions and a FusionAuth account. If you'd like to run FusionAuth yourself, you can [download it for free](https://fusionauth.io/download/).

If you want to follow along with this tutorial and do not want to bother about launching a WordPress instance or a FusionAuth instance, you can use the [Docker Compose script here](https://github.com/FusionAuth/fusionauth-example-wordpress-sso) to quickly set up a WordPress and FusionAuth instance. If you already have a WordPress instance and FusionAuth account, you can skip to [Adding FusionAuth to WordPress](#adding-fusionauth-sso-to-wordpress).

> Before you get started, be sure to have Docker installed and running on your computer and Docker Compose installed. You can find the installation guides for Docker [here](https://docs.docker.com/engine/install/) and the guides for Docker Compose [here](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/).

Reviewer: great prereq section, very clear

### Installing the plugin

For this tutorial, you will use the [OpenID Connect Generic plugin](https://github.com/oidc-wp/openid-connect-generic).

Go to your WordPress Admin Dashboard at `localhost:8030/wp-admin` and click on the "Plugins" page from the sidebar. Click on the "Add New" button, and on the next page, search for "OpenID Connect Generic".

The plugin should be the first one in the search results. You want the one by `daggerhart`. Install and activate the plugin.

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/select-plugin.png" alt="Selecting the WordPress OIDC plugin." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

Once the plugin is activated, choose "Settings" and then "OpenID Connect Client" from the left menu. This is where you will be able to configure the plugin to work with FusionAuth.

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/configure-oidc-generic-client-settings-start.png" alt="Configuring the WordPress OIDC plugin." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

But first, let's set up FusionAuth. After you do that, you'll return to finish configuring this WordPress plugin.

### Configuring FusionAuth

> To get started with SSO, you need to create an application in FusionAuth. An application represents the resource where users will log in to, in your case, the WordPress site. Each website, mobile app, or any other application should be created as an application in FusionAuth. Users can use the same username and password to log in to all such applications managed by FusionAuth.

Reviewer: I'd go into a bit more here of why users are logging into my word press site and not my original site - my first question was "wait, what happened to my photo-sharing app, and why isn't that the one being used for SSO?" May be good to demonstrate why WP is the SSO site and not the photo sharing app

Author: I tried to explain that a bit more.

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/application-list.png" alt="Applications list." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

In the "Add Application" screen, provide a name for your app. This is just for display purposes so that you can distinguish your apps.

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/create-application-initial-screen.png" alt="Initial create application screen." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

Now, click on the OAuth tab. The default settings should suffice. The only thing you need to provide is the "Authorized redirect URLs" value. These are the URLs where users will be redirected after they're authenticated. In this case, both URLs are provided and handled by the plugin. Enter these two URLs:

* `http://localhost:8030/wp-admin/admin-ajax.php?action=openid-connect-authorize`. This is the URL FusionAuth will redirect to after the user has logged in.
* `http://localhost:8030/wp-login.php?loggedout=true&wp_lang=en_US` This is the URL FusionAuth will redirect to after the user has logged out.

{% include _callout-tip.liquid content= "Your `wp_lang` value may vary if you use a different locale." %}

> Once you move this application into production, be sure to update the authorized redirect URLs!

Reviewer: To what?

You will now be presented with a list of your applications. Click on the view button (the green looking glass) next to the application you just created:

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/list-application-view-button.png" alt="View button on application list." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

A popup will open with the details about your application.

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/application-view-screen.png" alt="Application details view." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

Look for the "OAuth configuration" section. You may need to scroll down a bit:

{% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/application-view-screen-oauth-configuration.png" alt="Application details view with OAuth info." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

Keep this window open as you'll need to do a bit of copy-pasting from here in the next step.

## Configuring the Plugin

Return to your WordPress admin dashboard where you had the WordPress plugin information stored.

> {% include _image.liquid src="/assets/img/blogs/wordpress-sso-fusionauth/configure-oidc-generic-client-settings-start.png" alt="Configuring the WordPress OIDC plugin." class="img-fluid" figure=false %}

Reviewer: image is broken

* In the "Token Validation Endpoint URL" field, put `<your-fusionauth-domain>/oauth2/token`. In our case, it should be `http://localhost:9011/oauth2/token` . In our case, for the same reason, it will be `http://fusionauth:9011/oauth2/token`.
* In the "End Session Endpoint URL" field, put `<your-fusionauth-domain>/oauth2/logout`. In our case, it will be `http://localhost:9011/oauth2/logout`.
* Check "Disable SSL Verify" since none of our docker instances are running HTTPS.
* Change the "Identity Key" and "Nickname Key" values to `sub`. This is what WordPress will use as Ids internally.
* Change the "Display Name Formatting" to `{email}`. This is what will be displayed to the user in the WordPress admin screen.
* Check "Link Existing Users" if users in your local WordPress database have the same emails as users in your FusionAuth database; otherwise you'll see an error when those users try to log in. 

> Note that the "Authorize Endpoint" need not be changed since that will be opened in the browser. If you're not using Docker, you should keep all the URLs pointed at `localhost`.

Reviewer: is there anything special you should do if you are using docker?
